The next system we'll explore is Vertica.
Which is the relational DBMS
designed to operate on top of HTFS.
It belongs to a family of DBMS
architectures called column stores.
Other products in
the same family are UCDV,
Carrot Cell Xvelocity from Microsoft and
so forth.
The primary difference
between a row store and
a column store is shown
in the diagram here.
Logically, this table has five columns.
Emp number, department number,
hire date, employee last name and
employee first name.
In a row oriented design the database
internally organizes the record
two four by two.
In a column store,
the data is organized column wise.
So the nth number column is stored
separately from the department id
column and so forth.
Now suppose a query
needs to find the ID and
department ID of all employees who were
hired after first of January, 2001.
The system only needs to look up
the hire date column to figure
out which records qualify.
And then pick up the values of the ID,
and the department of ID columns for
the qualifying records.
The other columns are not touched.
So if a table has 30 to 50 columns, very
often only a few of them are needed for
any single query.
So for tables with 500 million rows and
40 columns a typical query is very fast,
and uses much less memory because a full
record is not used most of the time.
My own experience is that with
an application that needed a database
with 150 billion tuples in a table.
Accounting operation took a little
under three minutes to complete.
A second advantage of the column store
comes from the nature of the data.
In a column store,
data in every column is sorted.
The figure on the right shows
three sorted columns of a table
with three visible columns.
The bottom of the first column shown here
has many accurate sixteen
transactions on the same day.
The second column has customer ids which
can be numerically close to each other.
They are all within seventy
values of the first customer.
So in the first case we can just
say that the value is one, one,
2007, and
the next 16 records have this value.
That means we do not have to store
the next 16 values thus saving space.
Now this form of shortened
representation is called compression.
And this specific variety is
called run-length encoding or RLE.
Another form of encoding can
be seen in the second column.
Here the customer ids a long integer,
but for
the records shown there
are nearby numbers.
So, if we pick a value in the column and
just put the difference between
this value and
other values The difference will be small.
It means,
we'll need fewer bites to represent them.
This one of compression is called
Frame-of-reference encoding.
The lesson to remember here is
that compressed data presentation
can significantly reduce the total
size of a database and if BDMS.
Should use all such tricks
to improve space efficiency.
While the space efficiency and
performance of Vertica is impressive for
large data, one has to be careful
about how to design a system with it.
Like Google's Web Table, and
Apache Cassandra, Vertica allows
the declaration of column-groups.
These are columns like first name and
last name which are very
often accessed together.
In Vertica,
a column group is like a mini table
which is treated like a little
row storied in the system.
But because these groups represent
activists that are frequently co accessed
the grouping actually
improves performance.
So an application developer is
better off when the nature and
the frequency of user queries
are known to some degree.
And this knowledge is applies
to designing the column groups.
An important side effect of column
structure organization of vertical
Is that the writing of data into
Vertica is a little slower.
When rows are added to a table,
Vertica initially places
them in a row-wise data structure and
then converts them into a column-wise
data structure, which is then compressed.
This lowness can be perceptible for
large uploads or updates.
Vertica belongs to a new breed of
database systems that call themselves
analytical databases.
This means two slightly different things.
First, Vertica offers many more
statistical functions than in
classical DBMS.
For example one can perform
operations over a Window
to see an example consider a table of
stock ticks having a time attribute,
a stock name and
a value of the stock called bid here.
This shows that data values in
the table now we would like to compute
a moving average of
the bit every 40 seconds.
We show the query in a frame below.
Now we aren't going into the details of
the query just consider the blue part.
It says the average,
which is the AVG function in yellow.
It must be computed on
the last column which is bit.
But, this computation
must be over the range that is
computed on the timestamp call.
So, the range is defined by a 40
second row before that current row so,
here the computation of the average
advances for the stock abc.
And for each computation,
the system only considers the rows whose
timestamp is within 40 seconds
before the current row.
The table on the right shows
the result of the query.
The average value, 10.12.
Is the same as the actual value, because
there are no other rows within 40 seconds.
The next two result rows average
over the preceding rows,
was times R within 40
seconds of the current row.
When we get to the blue row,
that we notice that it occurs 1 minute
16 seconds after the previous row.
So we cannot consider the previous
sort in the computation.
Instead, the result is just the value
of the bid in the current row.
The takeaway from this example is
that analytical computations like
this are happening inside the database and
not in an external application.
This brings us to the second feature
of Vertica as an analytical database.
R is a well known free statistics
package that's used by statisticians,
data minors, predictive analytics experts.
Today, R can not only
read data from files,
but it can go to an SQL database and
grab data to perform statistical analysis.
Over time, R has evolved and
given rights to distributed R which
is a high performance platform for R.
As expected in this distributed setting,
the system operates in
a master slave mode.
The master node coordinates computations
by sending commands to the workers.
The worker nodes maintain
data partitions and
apply the computation
functions to the data.
Just getting the data parallelly,
the essential data structure
is a distributed array.
That is an array that is
partitioned as shown here.
Now in this diagram
the partitions are equal, but
in practice they may be
all different sizes.
On which, one can compute a function for
each of these mini-arrays.
The bottom diagram, shows a simple
work flow of constructing and
deploying a predictive model.
The role of Vertica here,
is that it's a data supplier to the worker
nodes of R, and a model consumer.
The data to be analyzed is
the output of the vertica query,
which is transferred in memory through
a protocol called vertica fast transfer
through distributed R as a dArray.
When the model is created in R,
it should come back as a code that
goes through vertica as a function.
This function can be
called from inside Vertica
as if it was a user defined function.
Now in sophisticated applications,
the features of the data needed for
predicted modeling will also be
computed inside the DBMS possibly
using the new analytical operations
of Vertica that we've just shown.
Now this will make future
computation much faster and
improve the efficiency of
the entire analytics process.
Going forward, we believe that most DBMS's
will want to play in the analytics field,
will support similar functions.